feat: add DefinitelyFormatted blog post (#270)
JoshuaKGoldberg/joshuakgoldberg-dot-com: src/content/blog/definitelyformatted/index.mdx

---
description: "How we migrated the massive DefinitelyTyped repository from using a linter for formatting to the dprint formatter."
image:
  alt: ""

>   src: "~/assets/blog/default.webp"

Author: Todo: find more thematic images around Helmuth von Moltke and his battles.

pubDate: 2024-04-29
title: "DefinitelyFormatted"
---

import battleOfKöniggrätz from "~/assets/blog/battle-of-königgrätz.webp";
import LabeledImage from "~/components/blog/mdx/LabeledImage.astro";

Last year, I had the pleasure of leading a project to onboard the massive [DefinitelyTyped](https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped) repository to using a dedicated formatter, [dprint](https://dprint.dev), with some members of the TypeScript community and team.
This change took us nearly half a year from start to end: initial discussions in late May and the last PR merged in early October.
It went through some twists and turns but I'm happy with how it all turned out.

> _"No plan survives first contact with the enemy"_
> -Helmuth von Moltke

## Context

DefinitelyTyped is one of the largest, most active repositories on GitHub.

> It contains over 9,000 folders storing community-authored TypeScript type definitions for JavaScript projects that don't ship their own types.

Author: > over 9,000

Note from @sandersn:

> technically, 8851, although it might have been over 9000 in 2023

```plaintext
$ git checkout master
  ...
$ ls -l types | wc -l
    8787
$ git checkout 1374f05e833b7f2edd100e76d48041ba2759b814
  ...
$ ls -l types | wc -l
    8638
```

Grr, so much for the 9,001 reference. Thanks @sandersn!

Not ideal.

### Formatting vs. Linting

At the same time we were looking at migrating DefinitelyTyped to ESLint, I was advocating in ESLint circles to [_"STOP USING ESLINT FOR FORMATTING"_](/blog/configuring-eslint-prettier-and-typescript-together#stop-using-eslint-for-formatting).
My belief is that _formatters_ such as [Prettier](https://prettier.io) and _linters_ such as [ESLint](https://eslint.org) are fundamentally different tools built for different purposes.
While you can use ESLint for formatting thanks to [ESLint Stylistic](https://eslint.style), [ESLint recommends using a separate dedicated formatter](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules) and [typescript-eslint also recommends against using ESLint for formatting](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/troubleshooting/formatting).

The drive to use a formatter for formatting instead of a linter was well-timed for the DefinitelyTyped migrations.
We could skip having to migrate the old TSLint formatting rules to the ESLint equivalents by using a formatter for formatting instead!
💡

## The Choices

### Continuous Integration

> Many repositories integrate formatters in up to three common ways:

Author: Tip from @sandersn:

```suggestion
Repositories commonly integrate formatters in up to three ways:
```

👌 cleaner!

Developer tooling projects such as formatters need "production" usage to exercise edge cases and collect real user feedback.
Moving DefinitelyTyped to dprint was a unique opportunity to lend a helping hand to dprint in the form of bug reports and feature requests.

David Sherret and Jake Bailey did end up sending several issues and pull requests around dprint and swc to support the work.
This is an incomplete list of the most important improvements:

- [dprint/dprint-plugin-typescript#533 Arrow function parameters containing comment has parens removed incorrectly](https://github.com/dprint/dprint-plugin-typescript/issues/533)
- [dprint/dprint-vscode#64 perf: lazily startup editor process](https://github.com/dprint/dprint-vscode/pull/64)
- [dprint/dprint#719 feat: nested directory specific configuration](https://github.com/dprint/dprint/pull/719)
- [swc-project/swc#7187 Parser error for type parameters containing a generic function signature](https://github.com/swc-project/swc/issues/7187)

One of the benefits of working with newer projects and ecosystem partners you're on close terms with is the ability to get issues resolved quickly.

> Many of the issues we filed as a part of this work were resolved within days -or even hours- by David or kdy.

Author: Note from @johnnyreilly:

> Be nice to have a link to kdy's profile (and David and Jake for that matter) 

👍 agreed!

The work wasn't practically difficult, but it was boring and tedious.

### Merge Bot Changes

The biggest change we made after the plan was on how to run the formatter for users.
Our initial plan was to have the existing DefinitelyTyped merge bot apply dprint formatting to PRs before merging them.
The bot was already creating commits on behalf of developers, so I'd hoped this would allow for keeping files formatted without bothering curmudgeonly developers.

Unfortunately, the DefinitelyTyped merge bot wasn't set up to have state between _"PR is approved and passing builds"_ and _"PR is merging"_.
We would need to add states like _"PR is being formatted"_, _"Formatting succeeded"_, and _"Formatting introduced build failures"_.

We ended up opting for a simpler approach of solely relying on a `dprint fmt run` run on the default branch after each commit.
It was much simpler to write and maintain than introducing new state flows to the existing merge bot.

There is still the edge case that auto-formatting might introduce [comment directive](#comment-directives) CI failures to the main branch.
We haven't seen that be a common pain point since this work went in.

> ## The Results

Author: From @johnnyreilly:

> In "Results" it might be nice to summarise what was achieved:
> * Definitely Typed is now consistently formatted using the dprint tool
> * That consistent formatting is maintained by running dprint on each commit to master

Agreed!
